Workflow Automation with Github Actions (#187)
se-edu/learningresources: contents/projectManagement/githubActions.md

<frontmatter>
  title: Workflow Automation with GitHub Actions
  header: pagetop.md
  footer: footer.md
  head: head.md
  siteNav: mainNav.md
  pageNav: 3
</frontmatter>

<div class="website-content">

{{ booktitle | safe }}

# GitHub Actions

Author: [Alfred Yip](https://github.com/alyip98)

Reviewers: [James Pang](https://github.com/jamessspanggg), [Tan Yuanhong](https://github.com/le0tan), [Tejas Bhuwania](https://github.com/Tejas2805)

<box id="article-toc">

> * [What is GitHub Actions‎](#what-is-github-actions)

Reviewer: can match this ToC with the siteNav's

    Each workflow is defined as a `.yml` file in the `.github/workflows` directory of a repository.

* **Action**
    An action is a piece of code that performs an atomic task. 
    For example, [checking out a repository](https://github.com/actions/checkout), or [caching dependencies](https://github.com/actions/cache).

* **Triggers**
    Workflows can be triggered by events on the GitHub repository, ranging from opening pull requests or issues, making commits to scheduled events, or even from an external event by calling GitHub's REST API endpoint.

---

## Set Up a Simple Workflow for a Node.js App
<!--
Provide a learning path for the reader. Try to give one good learning path rather than many random resources.
--> 

GitHub has made it extremely easy to set up a simple workflow without even leaving the browser. 

![](images/actions-tab.png)

1. Head to the Actions tab on your repository
1. You can choose to set up a workflow from a template or from scratch. We will use the Node.js template in this example
1. The online editor is powerful and easy to use, boasting features such as inline documentation and autocomplete
![](images/editor.png)
1. The template workflow will

>     1. Begin when a commit is pushed or a pull request is opened to `master`

Reviewer: think can use a different type of ordered list aka (`i`, `ii`) here

Author: I prefer numbered sublists

    1. Checkout the current repo (using `actions/checkout`)
    1. Install dependencies `npm ci`
    1. Build `npm run build --if-present`
    1. Run tests `npm run test`
    1. Report the status of the workflow via a status badge
    ![](images/status.png)
1. Since we set the workflow up on the `master` branch, when we commit the newly-created workflow file, we can see GitHub Actions in action by navigating to the Actions tab
    ![](images/progress.png)

---

## Where to Go From Here
<!--
Give more resources. Instead of listing a lot of links, provide a brief summary of what value each resource can provide the reader.
-->
The official [documentation](https://help.github.com/en/actions) is a good resource to learn more about GitHub Actions.
The [starter workflows](https://github.com/actions/starter-workflows) repository contains good examples of 
CI workflows for popular languages as well as automation workflows for GitHub.

> Here are a list of [awesome actions](https://github.com/sdras/awesome-actions) that you can use when writing your workflow.

Reviewer: *Here is a list

    ![](images/status.png)
1. Since we set the workflow up on the `master` branch, when we commit the newly-created workflow file, we can see GitHub Actions in action by navigating to the Actions tab
    ![](images/progress.png)

---

## Where to Go From Here
<!--
Give more resources. Instead of listing a lot of links, provide a brief summary of what value each resource can provide the reader.
-->
The official [documentation](https://help.github.com/en/actions) is a good resource to learn more about GitHub Actions.
The [starter workflows](https://github.com/actions/starter-workflows) repository contains good examples of 
CI workflows for popular languages as well as automation workflows for GitHub.
Here are a list of [awesome actions](https://github.com/sdras/awesome-actions) that you can use when writing your workflow.
 

A powerful extension to GitHub Actions is to use the [github-script](https://github.com/actions/github-script) action 
to run JavaScript within the workflow using GitHub's [Octokit](https://octokit.github.io/rest.js/v17/) API. 
The Octokit API allows you to create workflows that span across GitHub's ecosystem of services.

> I have also compiled a list of popular repositories that use GitHub Actions that you can use as a reference. Do note that this is far from a comprehensive list and is more of a sample of how organizations are leveraging GitHub Actions in their development and production workflow.

Reviewer 2: Avoid using `I` as more authors might join in future.

> <panel header="Repositories that use GitHub Actions">

Reviewer 2: This panel title can be more aligned with the purpose. e.g., `Examples of different ways GitHub Actions can be used`

<frontmatter>
  title: Workflow Automation with GitHub Actions
  header: pagetop.md
  footer: footer.md
  head: head.md
  siteNav: mainNav.md
  pageNav: 3
</frontmatter>

<div class="website-content">

{{ booktitle | safe }}

# GitHub Actions

📝 [Alfred Yip](https://github.com/alyip98)

> 🔎 [James Pang](https://github.com/jamessspanggg), [Tan Yuanhong](https://github.com/le0tan), [Tejas Bhuwania](https://github.com/Tejas2805)

Reviewer 2: For consistency, don't use emojis and format authors/reviewers similar to other articles.

<box id="article-toc">

* [What is GitHub Actions‎](#what-is-github-actions)
* [Why GitHub Actions‎](#why-github-actions)
* [How does GitHub Actions Work‎](#how-does-github-actions-work)
* [How is GitHub Actions Being Used‎](#how-is-github-actions-being-used)
* [How to Get Started with GitHub Actions‎](#how-to-get-started-with-github-actions)
* [Where to Go From Here‎](#where-to-go-from-here)
</box>

## What is GitHub Actions
<!--Explain how X fits into the big picture of SE. Describe it relative to topics the reader is likely to know.-->

> GitHub Actions is a workflow automation solution that is tightly integrated into the GitHub ecosystem. It is commonly used to provide end-to-end continuous integration and continuous deployment (CI/CD) directly in your repository. With its tight integration with GitHub's ecosystem of services, users have the potential to automate more than just CI/CD.

Reviewer 2: tight integration mentioned twice in the space of two sentences. Can do with just one.

---

## Why GitHub Actions
<!--Motivate the reader to learn about X. Describe benefits of X to make the reader interested in X. Try to give a balanced view of by mentioning also WHY NOT X i.e., mention both advantages and disadvantages.-->

### 1. Easy to Use
Setting up a workflow in a repository is easy and hassle-free. [Starter workflows](https://github.com/actions/starter-workflows) for popular languages are available and the built-in editor offers code completion and documentation at a glance.
![](images/editor.png)

### 2. Reusable Actions
Actions are small, reusable units in a workflow. When setting up a workflow, we can reuse actions written by the community. These actions are available at the marketplace.

![](images/marketplace.png)

### 3. Cross OS Support
GitHub Actions gives you the option to [run workflows](https://help.github.com/en/actions/reference/virtual-environments-for-github-hosted-runners#supported-runners-and-hardware-resources) on Ubuntu, Windows and macOS.

### 4. Docker Support
GitHub Actions provides the ability to run docker images for projects that use a dockerized environment.

### 5. Powerful

> Integration with the GitHub ecosystem allows GitHub Actions to do more than just build/test/deploy. You can automate everything related to your GitHub project, including bug triaging, labeling, automated dependency updating etc.

Reviewer 2: >Integration with the GitHub ecosystem allows GitHub Actions to do more than just build/test/deploy.

Something very similar was mentioned earlier in the article. Given this is a short chapter, try to avoid repetition.

Workflows can be triggered by events that happen on GitHub and will have access to the context of the issue/PR/commit that triggered it. 

### 6. Affordable
Like many of its competitors, GitHub Actions provides **free unlimited runner time for public repositories**. 

> For private repositories, the free plan offers 2000 minutes of runner time per month and a pay-per-minute plan for additional minutes.

Reviewer 2: Giving specific numbers increase the risk of the article getting outdated. I'm not sure the recent GitHub change to increase the free tier makes this section outdated already, even before it is published. 
Say something like `free plan offers ample runner minutes ...`

---

## How does GitHub Actions Work
<!--This is a simple high-level overview of the tool to give the reader some concrete sense of X (as opposed to limiting to an entirely abstract description). It's useful to give concrete examples such as code examples. Do not try to 'teach' how to use the X (assuming your in the style of a tutorial. If the tool is worth learning, there must be good tutorials about it already.-->
### Workflow
A workflow describes a sequence of jobs to be run when a trigger event occurs. 
Each job consists of a series of steps, which may be actions or shell commands. 
Each workflow is defined as a `.yml` file in the `.github/workflows` directory of a repository.

### Action
An action is a piece of code that performs an atomic task. 
For example, [checking out a repository](https://github.com/actions/checkout), or [caching dependencies](https://github.com/actions/cache).

### Triggers
Workflows can be triggered by events on the GitHub repository, ranging from opening pull requests or issues, making commits to scheduled events, or even from an external event by calling GitHub's REST API endpoint.

> 

Reviewer 2: These sections can be bullet points. No need to add a lot of headings.

---

## How is GitHub Actions Being Used

**Simple CI [workflow](https://github.com/actions/starter-workflows/blob/master/ci/node.js.yml) for a Node.js app**
1. Trigger when a commit/pull request is made to the master branch
2. Install dependencies
3. Build

> 4. Run tests with multiple versions of Node on Ubuntu

Reviewer 2: It's better to use `1. ` for all items. Markdown generates the correct number for each item.

**[Issue Labeling](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/blob/master/.github/workflows/needs-attention.yml)**
1. Trigger when a new issue is opened
2. Check issue body for required information
    1. If issue is missing information (e.g. steps to reproduce) 
    2. Add comment to ask author to provide missing information
    3. Add `Needs Author Feedback` label
3. Otherwise,
    1. Add `Needs Attention` label

> 

Reviewer 2: Seems some explanations are missing from this section e.g., there is no intro

---

## Set Up a Simple Workflow for a Node.js App
<!--
Provide a learning path for the reader. Try to give one good learning path rather than many random resources.
--> 

GitHub has made it extremely easy to set up a simple workflow without even leaving the browser. 

![](images/actions-tab.png)

1. Head to the Actions tab on your repository
2. You can choose to set up a workflow from a template or from scratch. We will use the Node.js template in this example

> 3. The online editor is powerful and easy to use, boasting features such as inline documentation and autocomplete

Reviewer 2: This item too contains some info mentioned earlier.

### Repositories That Use GitHub Actions

Org/Project | Workflows | Notes
--- | --- | ---
Bootstrap | [test](https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap/blob/master/.github/workflows/test.yml) | Comprehensive set of tests including custom tests and coveralls
Oh My Zsh | [test](https://github.com/ohmyzsh/ohmyzsh/blob/master/.github/workflows/main.yml) | Workflow uses mainly shell commands
React Native | [needs-attention](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/blob/master/.github/workflows/needs-attention.yml), [process-label-actions](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/blob/master/.github/workflows/process-label-actions.yml) | Automatically apply labels to newly created issues and adds comments to issues based on labels
Node.js | [workflows](https://github.com/nodejs/node/tree/master/.github/workflows) | Linters, tests and build jobs
Chart.js | [CI](https://github.com/chartjs/Chart.js/blob/master/.github/workflows/ci.yml) | Conditional workflow for windows and ubuntu

> Next.js | [workflows](https://github.com/zeit/next.js/tree/canary/.github/workflows) | Complex yet well structured build/test/deploy workflow. Automatically reports bundle size statistics in pull requests and on releases. Scheduled tests that run every 12 hours.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this section adds much value, or can be replaced with just one sentence.

Author: This entire section? I think that readers may learn more from examples of GitHub Actions used in production compared to sandboxed examples such as the one above.

Reviewer 2: It's fine if they are supposed to serve as educational examples. Can keep.

<frontmatter>
  title: Workflow Automation with Github Actions
  header: pagetop.md
  footer: footer.md
  head: head.md
  siteNav: mainNav.md
  pageNav: 3
</frontmatter>

<div class="website-content">

{{ booktitle | safe }}

> 

Reviewer: can add a table of contents here, refer to other PRs for examples

Author: Just curious, is there a real need for this aside from being consistent, since the right navbar doubles as a ToC?

Reviewer: oh it will be responsive based on screen size, it will not show until ur screen is of a certain smaller size.

# Github Actions

📝 [@alyip98](https://github.com/alyip98)

🔎 

> ## What is Github Actions?

Reviewer: Change all Github -> GitHub

<!--Explain how X fits into the big picture of SE. Describe it relative to topics the reader is likely to know.-->
Github Actions is a workflow automation solution that is tightly integrated into the Github ecosystem. It is commonly used to provide end-to-end continuous integration and continuous deployment (CI/CD) directly in your repository. With its tight integration with Github's ecosystem of services, users have the potential to automate more than just CI/CD.

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps you can define the `workflow`, `actions` and `triggers` here instead of at How Does GitHub Actions work? Because I think that these are the basic knowledge that the reader should know before diving into the benefits and so on.

Then the How Does GitHub Actions work section should just be Example GitHub Actions Workflow. 

My 2 cents haha

---

## Why Github Actions?
<!--Motivate the reader to learn about X. Describe benefits of X to make the reader interested in X. Try to give a balanced view of by mentioning also WHY NOT X i.e., mention both advantages and disadvantages.-->

> ### Easy to use

Reviewer 3: Easy to Use

Setting up a workflow in a repository is easy and hassle-free. Templates for popular languages are available and the built-in editor offers code completion and documentation at a glance.
![](https://i.imgur.com/JiVXlO4.png)

> ### Reusable actions

Reviewer: Can consider using title case for all headers

> ### Reusable actions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Reusable Actions
```

> Actions are a small, reusable unit in a workflow. When setting up a workflow, we can use actions written by the community. The marketplace allows users to browse actions written by others for use in our workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Actions are small, reusable units in a workflow. When setting up a workflow, we can re-use actions that were already written by the community. These actions are available at the marketplace.
```

![](https://i.imgur.com/m9PddIu.png)

> ### Cross OS support

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Cross OS Support
```

Github Actions gives you the option to [run workflows](https://help.github.com/en/actions/reference/virtual-environments-for-github-hosted-runners#supported-runners-and-hardware-resources) on Ubuntu, Windows and macOS.

> ### Docker support

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Docker Support
```

Github Actions provides the ability to run docker images for projects that use a dockerized environment.

### Powerful
Integration with the Github ecosystem allows Github Actions to do more than just build/test/deploy. You can automate everything related to your Github project, including bug triaging, labeling, automated dependency updating etc.

### Affordable
The free plan offers 2000 minutes of build time per month for public repositories and a pay-per-minute plan for further use.

---

> ## How does Github Actions work

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## How Does Github Actions Work?
```

> ## How does Github Actions work

Reviewer 4: Since these benefits' descriptions are relatviely short, probably consider using numbered list instead of titles?
e.g. `1. **Affordable**: ...`

<!--This is a simple high-level overview of the tool to give the reader some concrete sense of X (as opposed to limiting to an entirely abstract description). It's useful to give concrete examples such as code examples. Do not try to 'teach' how to use the X (assuming your in the style of a tutorial. If the tool is worth learning, there must be good tutorials about it already.-->
### Concepts
#### Workflow
A workflow describes a sequence of jobs to be run when a trigger event occurs. Each job consists of a series of steps, which may be actions or terminal commands. Each workflow is defined as a `.yml` file in the `.github/workflows` directory of a repository.

#### Action
An action is a piece of code that performs one single modular task. For example, [checking out a repository](https://github.com/actions/checkout).

#### Triggers
Workflows can be triggered by events on the Github repository, ranging from opening pull requests or issues, making commits to scheduled events, or even from an external event by calling Github's REST API endpoint.

> ### How is Github Actions being used

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### How is GitHub Actions Being Used?
```

> #### Simple CI/CD workflow example for a NodeJS app

Reviewer 3: Can you try to shorten the heading? Too big for a heading I think.

1. Trigger when a commit/pull request is made to master
2. Build
3. Run tests on ubuntu
4. Deploy app if tests pass

##### [Workflow file](https://github.com/actions/starter-workflows/blob/master/ci/node.js.yml)
```yaml
name: Node.js CI

on:
  push:
    branches: [ master ]
  pull_request:
    branches: [ master ]

jobs:
  build:

    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    strategy:
      matrix:
        node-version: [10.x, 12.x]

    steps:
    - run: echo Hello World!
    - uses: actions/checkout@v2
    - name: Use Node.js ${{ matrix.node-version }}
      uses: actions/setup-node@v1
      with:
        node-version: ${{ matrix.node-version }}
    - run: npm ci
    - run: npm run build --if-present
    - run: npm test
      env:
        CI: true
    - run: npm run deploy
```

> ## How to Get Started with X?

Reviewer: How to Get Started with GitHub Actions?

Reviewer 3: Whichever way you decide to go ahead, please make sure to do it in titleCase

<!--
Provide a learning path for the reader. Try to give one good learning path rather than many random resources.
-->

> The [official documentation](https://help.github.com/en/actions/getting-started-with-github-actions/overview) provides a useful overview of Github Actions (summarized in this article), but it does not give you a clear and easy to follow path to getting started. This is a mini-guide for you to get started with Github Actions.

Reviewer: Not sure if it's a good idea to critique the official documentation...

> ### Set up a simple workflow (Node.js)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Set up a Simple Workflow (Node.js)
```

Fortunately for us, Github has made it extremely easy to set up a simple workflow without even leaving their website. 

> ![](https://i.imgur.com/zC4ScYn.png)

Reviewer 4: Consider pushing the static asset to the repo instead of linking to an external service.

1. Head to the Actions tab on your repository
2. You can choose to set up a workflow from a template or from scratch. We will use the Node.js template in this example
3. The online editor is very powerful and easy to use, boasting features such as inline documentation and autocomplete

> ![](https://i.imgur.com/gknkruJ.png)

Reviewer 4: same as the last one, consider using static asset within repo

4. The template workflow (similar to the example above) will
    1. Begin when a commit is pushed or a pull request is opened to `master`
    2. Checkout the current repo (using `actions/checkout`)
    3. Install dependencies `npm ci`
    4. Build `npm run build --if-present`
    5. Run tests `npm run test`
    6. Report the status of the workflow via a status badge
    ![](https://i.imgur.com/3Tsm2Ii.png)
5. Since we set the workflow up on the `master` branch, when we commit the newly-created workflow file, we can see Github Actions in action by navigating to the Actions tab

>     ![](https://i.imgur.com/ZxBlv8d.png)

Reviewer 4: same here

> ## Where to Go from Here?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Where to Go From Here?
```

> ## Where to Go from Here?

Reviewer 4: Probably you may recommend some widely used actions like [cache](https://github.com/actions/cache), etc.

<!--
Give more resources. Instead of listing a lot of links, provide a brief summary of what value each resource can provide the reader.
-->

> The official [documentation](https://help.github.com/en/actions) is a good resource to learn more about Github Actions. It is not an easy read as the information is dense and not organised in a linear manner, but it serves its purpose well as documentation.

Reviewer: Same here, not sure if a good idea to critique the official documentation
